Of course, that process had left me physically and
intellectually tired. And so when I met this
candidate, Dr. Dean Corrigan, C-O-R-R-I-G-A-N,
then the Dean of Education at the University of
Maryland,
I was feeling that he had really better do a good job
or that I might discount his capability
quickly.
By that point in my search committee experience,
I tried to begin each interviewee's campus visit
with a, quote, introductory session, quote, in
which I, as the search committee chairman, would
introduce the visitor
at a session to which all members of the college
faculty had been invited.
They would have been provided with a brief resume
of the newcomer.
And I would then introduce the individual
who would be asked to describe
background of experience,
and then discuss for the faculty
what they thought were the major issues facing
the general field in this case, of education.
Also, we agreed in advance that the questions
would not be informational
quiz questions, but would be
general in nature, trying to obtain a broader view
of the speaker's attitudes and feelings.
Paragraph.
Within a few minutes after Dean Corrigan began his
presentation,
my mind and spirit was quickly awakened and alert.
He seemed soon, he was the almost unanimous choice
of everyone. And he came to A&M
and fulfilled the expectations of so many people.
Paragraph. Back in the early Calhoun and Williams
days, one of the brief
efforts which proved to be very productive was to
select
a few highly competent and young alumni who seemed
to offer great promise for future success.
These youngsters would serve as aides to the
president, the vice president for academic
affairs,
and also work in Austin.
The success of such an effort can be demonstrated
when the identity of these men is
mentioned as Kent Caperton,
who had been president of the student body under
Dr. Williams. and would later be an outstanding
state senator and lawyer. He assisted Dr.
Williams. Dave Mayfield, a product of
architecture,
who would go on to great success in his profession,
served with those of us in academic affairs. And at
this point, I cannot remember the young man from
Hamilton, Texas,
who
was one of the key members of the A&M staff in
Austin, serving as a sort of intern lobbyist,
lobbyist in turn.
The success of these three not only in what they did
but what they became
leads
me now to wonder why didn't
we continue that practice
in future years
because the cost, the financial cost was
comparatively modest and the returns in future
capability of the individuals and meaningful
benefit to the institution was remarkably
substantial.
During those years, during the Williams years,
the president's office was on the second floor at
the south end of what we call the System Building,
the magnificent white marble structure facing
east toward Texas Avenue.
As president
of both the university, of both Texas A&M
University
and the A&M system,
Earl Rudder and Jack Williams could and did make
decisions without having to send them up to
another level of bureaucratic delay, review, and
delay.
The bureaucracy
in numbers, layers,
and cost in time and personnel
was quite modest. The effectiveness was even more
impressive.
Both Rudder and Williams were able to move the
institution forward in every way there could be
measurement.
including enrollment,
quality of student body, research volume in
dollars,
and significance,
as well as national image
and reputation.
All of us were more and more proud to be a part of
Texas A&M.
Paragraph. As dean of faculties, one of my
responsibilities was to attend coordinating
board meetings
in Austin. That agency was responsible for
the coordination quote of all public higher
education in the state. Thus, that group of
gubernatorial appointees
have the authority to
authorize
all academic areas of study, organizational
pattern,
and enrollment
quality of each institution.
Thus, it was they
who could control
the general direction
of every public campus in Texas, even at the level
superior to the regions.
The opportunity for me to attend coordinating
board meetings was very meaningful in terms of my
understanding of higher education and future
capability to relate to governing boards and
state agencies.
I believe that the Coordinating Board included
perhaps 21 members, 18 to 21, something like that.
A broad variety, geographic, in terms of
geographic fake background,
opinions, attitudes, et cetera.
This is a note to the typist. At this point I'm in San
Marcos and just realized that I missed a turn way
back down the road and gone a bit out of my way. So
we'll get back on the track though of the
coordinating board.
As the A&M administrator who attended all
coordinating board meetings, I became the
accompanist for all
new A&M degree program requests and or
organizational changes
and gradually became well acquainted with the key
coordinating board staff members.
Particularly Ken, whose name I cannot think of,
who would for a long time be the Commissioner of
Higher Education for Texas.
The most important of these
program changes at A&M began one morning with a
call from Jack Williams.
Dr. Calhoun was out of town,
and as I recall,
I answered the phone
and came to instant
attitudinal attention when Dr. Williams
Ask directed when Ernie and me. To come over to his
office as soon as we could get there.
We hurry across the street. Wondering what?
The new task might be.
And we're greeted. With a quick smile.
and a truly challenging
statement. Quote, I don't think you guys can do
this,
Dash, but I want here on my desk by this time next
week all of the paperwork it will take
for us to be able to request officially, through
the Board of Regents,
Coordinating Board, and the legislature,
authority to offer degrees in medicine and law at
Texas A&M.
Quickly, as we returned, Dick and I quickly
divided the task
with medicine for him and law for me.
And we worked
tirelessly
with the always determined and capable staff.
and succeeded in
reaching the
assigned goal one day before the deadline which
Dr. Williams had set.
As the process began to evolve,
all around the state, the other institutions that
offered law and or medicine,
whether public or private,
began to speak out in loud opposition to any A&M
effort in that direction.
Nevertheless, we proceeded
and the regents approved the request
as we tried to go forward.
In regard to law, the only ally we were able to
identify was the great Houston lawyer, Leon, and I
can't think of his last name,
a graduate of Baylor who had a
most admirable career including
having served on the staff
of the Nuremberg trials following World War II.
Probably because of his influence,
A&M was offered the South Texas College of Law. I
understood that A&M was offered the South Texas
College of Law
with almost no strings attached except
that it would never be able to offer any law courses
outside Harris County.
Dr. Williams declined that restriction because
he wanted law and medicine as a part of the process
to broaden A&M's
academic view
and influence.
Meanwhile,
I became a junior partner in Winerdi's effort on
medicine.
In that process, we happened to stumble onto a
minor,
what was possibly thought of as a minor addition
to
an act of the Texas legislature in 1943. That
amendment
gave legal authorization
to a medical school, quote, Affiliated with the
Scott and White Clinic in Temple, TX. Quote. If it
was attached. To a public institution.
After that discovery.
Hey. Maroon and white.
Lit. Caravan quickly headed to Scott and White.
And received a warm. Reading.
In addition, Dr. Williams hoped to make the A&M
Medical Program a three-way partnership
by including both Scott and Point in Temple and the
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. And the
lawyer's name I was trying to think of a moment ago
was Leon Jaworski, J-A-W-O-R-S-K-I.
Dr. Williams Paragraph was well acquainted with
the great heart surgeon, whose name escapes me
right now, who then headed Baylor Medicine.
And so for a number of months, we proceeded with
that tripartite plan.
Our application could not be stopped at the state
level because legal authorization had already
been given by the 1943 legislation. It did not
include funding and the other medical groups in
Texas joined in opposing an additional
competitor for state
dollars. Meanwhile, our application to the
American Medical Association's accrediting
group
seemed to stall without any explanation.
Then one day I happened to stumble onto the fact
that that group was headed by an individual who had
been
terminated for some unknown reason
by the Baylor administration a number of years
earlier.
That led the A&M planners to assume that we would
not have any success with the American Medical
Association's bureaucracy unless we terminated
the Baylor link.
Paragraph thus, with only Scott and White and A&M
as partners, the plan was approved without delay.
And we proceeded to dream of a medical school where
the students would attend their first two years of
study at college station and the two latter two
clinical years in temple at the splendid scott and
serve at the splendid scott and white hospital
the emphasis in the A&M proposal was on
broad service, family medicine, and community
effort.
The plan would be for every student to begin making
rounds in Brazos County
with medical practitioners the first day of the
student's first year of medical school. Then in
Temple, they would be in one of the most innovative
medical, most innovative hospitals in the United
States.
Hold on, typist. I'm having to consult my roadmap
here.
One of the key moments in the search for funding
came one day in College Station.
when the,
when Tiger Teague, when Olin Teague,
the Tiger to his A&M classmates
and countless others who knew him as a World War II
hero,
and a determined congressional leader joined the
group.
In some manner of discussion,
he noted that he wished he could help A&M get some
funding but that he didn't know anything he could
do as a member of Congress. Yet he wished as
chairman of the Veterans Affairs Committee that
something could be done to get medical schools to
help Veterans Administration hospitals that
were because they were beginning to suffer. a
shortage of medical practitioners.
I quickly broke in
by mentioning that there was a veteran's hospital
across the street from Scott and White up in
Temple. Quietly, Mr. Teague smiled, pulled out a
note card from his pocket, and wrote something
on that page.
Perhaps